HOLE: A Program for the Analysis of the Pore Dimensions
of Ion Channel Structural Models

Oliver S. Smarta*, Joseph G. Neduvelila$, Xiaonan Wanga, B. A. Wallacea and
Mark S. P. Sansomb 

a Department of Crystallography
  Birkbeck College
  Malet Street 
  London WC1E 7HX
  England

b Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics
  The Rex Richards Building
  University of Oxford
  Oxford OX1 3QU
  England

* Address for correspondence: o.smart@mail.cryst.bbk.ac.uk,
                              (fax + 44 171 631 6803)
                              
$ current address: Merck Sharp & Dohme Research Laboratories,
                   Neuroscience Research Centre, Terlings Park, 
                   Eastwick Road, Harlow CM20 2QR, Essex, England


Paper for consideration as J. Mol. Graphics paper 


Abstract

A method (HOLE) which allows the analysis of the dimensions of the pore running through a
structural model of an ion channel is presented. The algorithm uses a Monte Carlo Simulated
Annealing procedure to find the best route for a sphere with variable radius to squeeze through the
channel. Results can be displayed in a graphical fashion or visualized with most common
molecular graphics packages. Recent advances include a method to analyse the anisotropy within a
pore. The method can also be used to predict the conductance of channels using a simple
empirically-corrected ohmic model. Further details can be found on the HOLE home page. The
software is available free on request to workers at non-profit making organizations. 

1.0 Introduction

In excess of a third of the proteins found in the yeast genome are thought to be
membrane-integral1. Ion channels are important class of membrane proteins2. These proteins
allow the translocation of ions across the hydrophobic barriers presented by lipid bilayers, and are
often gated by the action of voltage gradients or the binding of small ligand molecules (such as
neurotransmitters). 

Despite the obvious interest ion channels there are a limited number of structural studies currently
available1. This is principally due to the difficulty in structure determination of integral membrane
proteins, both by crystallographic and NMR methods. In contrast to this, membrane proteins
provide an attractive target for modelling studies. In part this is because of the limited possibility
of main chain groups forming hydrogen bonds with solvent in the lipid environment. As a
consequence there is a restriction in the number of secondary structures available3. Modelling
provides an attractive option in adding value to mutagenesis4 or low resolution structural studies
such as by electron microscopy5. 

The increasing number of experimental and modelling studies on channels led us to identify the
need for dedicated methods for analysing important structural features6. In particular all current
structures of channels have a cavity running through them. This cavity or pore is normally filled
with solvent and provides the pathway for ion translocation. 

Many methods exist for looking at the surface of proteins and cavities inside them. Most molecular
graphics programs have routines for displaying the van der Waals surface of molecules and often
can display the solvent accessible surface, as pioneered by Connolly7. Specialised methods exist for
isolating cavities within proteins, notably the commonly used voido8 method and proact9 which
introduces a powerful classification method. Recently a method which concentrates on analysing
pockets on the surface of proteins thus allowing easy identification of active sites has been
developed10 . Although all the methods could potentially be used to analyse ion channels, the
specialised nature of the molecules makes a dedicated set of routines desirable. 

This paper summarises work on the program HOLE which concentrates on analysing the
dimensions of the pores running through molecules. Recent developments11 allowing the analysis
of anisotropy and prediction of conductance properties are described. As an example an analysis is
then made of the pore properties of cholera toxin B5. 






2. Methods

HOLE Monte Carlo Simulated Annealing

The HOLE method has been described in detail elsewhere6, 11. The program requires the user to
supply the coordinates of the ion channel of interest in Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (pdb)
format. An initial point p which lies anywhere within the central channel is also needed. In
addition the user specifies a vector v that is approximately in the direction of the channel (normally
referred to as the channel direction vector). The program reads atoms from within the pdb file and
sets up a van der Waals radius for each (various sets are available). It is normal to exclude solvent
and ions during the read: the program allows this by the specification of a keyword stating the
residue types to ignore.

It is easy to find the maximum radius R(p) of a sphere centred at a point p without overlap with the
van der Waals surface of any atom: 
                       R(p) = mini=1Natom [|Xi-p|- vdWi] 
where Xi is the position of atom number i, vdWi its van der Waals radius and Natom the total
number of atoms. The radius R(p) can be regarded as an objective function of the point p. By using
Monte Carlo simulated annealing, adjusting p, the radius of the sphere can be maximized within
the pore of the channel. In all cases p is kept on a plane normal to the channel direction vector v: 

Note that all distance searches are conducted in three dimensions. Once the highest radius sphere
centre on a particular plane has been established a new search is initiated by taking a step of length
s in the direction of the channel direction vector v. This results in searches being conducted for a
series of parallel planes with a sphere of maximum radius being found for each: 

The net result can be thought of as producing the locus of a flexible sphere "squeezing" through the
centre of the ion channel. The use of Monte Carlo Simulated Annealing reduces the possibility of
the routine getting stuck in a local minimum. In addition it allows the mapping out of complex
internal topologies (such as annexin V12) using multiple runs. 

A flow chart giving a detailed description of the basic HOLE method is available.

Visualization methods

There are a number of ways to analyze and visualize the results of a HOLE run. One of the most
useful is plot a graph of pore radius against coordinate z along the channel direction vector v: 

A graph can be used to examine issues such as how tight the central constriction of the channel is,
whether water molecules could fit within the channel and how large the mouth of the pore is. The
HOLE package does not explicitly produce graphs but instead provides easily accessible numerical
information so that the user can use the graph plotting program of his/her choice.

Graphical presentation can be complimented by examination of HOLE objects using a molecular
graphics program. Two objects can be produced and displayed in conjunction with the ion channel
structural model. 

     The centre line of the channel can be shown by plotting the locus of the centre of the sphere
     as it proceeds through the channel. 
     The locus of the surface of the spheres define the pore lining surface. It is often useful to
     colour code the surface. The standard scheme is to use red to indicate parts of the pore where
     there is insufficient room to accommodate a water molecule, green where a single water
     molecule could be placed and blue for places sufficiently large for two water molecules to be
     placed side by side: 
                                               
                             (click to see picture full size)

The HOLE package is designed to be used primarily with the quanta molecular graphics program.
However, conversion routines are supplied to allow use with: 

     Sybyl 
     InsightII 
     O - Alwyn Jones crystallographic package. For further details see the O home page. 
     mage: Kinemage is a protein display and viewing language developed by David Richardson.
     Kinemages can be viewed by the mage program which is available in versions for
     MS-windows, mac and various unix machines. Mage is available by ftp from
     suna.biochem.duke.edu. (If you have mage then you can use this example). 
     Work which is still in progress allows the use of Virtual Reality Modeling Language
     (VRML) which may become the world wide web standard way of representing 3D objects. If
     you have a suitable viewer (see http://www.ch.ic.ac.uk/VRML/ for details) then try looking
     at the standard gramicidin example in vrml format.

A recent advance allows an alternative view of the internal surface of a pore - from the inside. In
this case we set up a cylindrical co-ordinate system working from the pore centreline: 
                                              
                           (click to see picture full size)

This coordinate system can then be used to display properties of the pore lining in two dimensions.
A simple way of imagining how the maps are constructed is to imagine that the internal surface of
the pore is cut down a line and then rolled flat. A number of properties of the internal surface of
the pore can then be displayed, for instance, whether the surface is lined by oxygen or nitrogen
atoms. The versatile contour plotting program surfer is used to process data produced by HOLE.
This provides a very different way of looking at the gramicidin channel: 
                                             
                           (click to see picture full size)

Analyzing anisotropy

The use of a spherical probe to analyse the pore dimensions of a channel has proved to be extremely
useful6, 11. However, the pores of many larger ion channels are clearly anisotropic as exemplified
by porins 15,16. To be able to analyse and consistently measure such structural aspects an extension
of the original HOLE method is introduced. 

Instead of using a sphere to probe the internal surface of the channel in question a spherocylinder
(capsule) is considered. This object can be considered to be a simple extension of a sphere where the
centre is spread from a point onto a line section. It can be defined in terms of three properties: two
centres and a radius (in comparison to a sphere which has a single centre and a radius): 
                                             
                           (click to see picture full size)

In the HOLE method the axis of the capsule is held at right angles to the channel direction vector v.
Only small adaptations are required to implement this: instead of a single centre being considered
in the optimization, two independent centres are introduced. Each of these is constrained to move
on a plane normal to the channel direction vector v. Instead of optimizing the radius of the sphere
as in the original routine the area of the capsule on the plane normal to v is maximized (although
this is converted in the program into an effective radius to ease comparisons). As the number of
independent variables is doubled from two to four, more steps of simulated annealing are required
to achieve stability in results. Despite this increased cpu requirement most channels can be
analyzed in well under one hour of cpu time on a modern workstation. The result of optimizing a
capsule inside the pore of gramicidin is shown below: 
                                                
                           (click to see picture full size)
The use of the capsule option allows the measurement of the anisotropy of a channel and properties
such as the rotation of the capsule vector as it proceeds through the channel. Examples of this can
be found in the Applications section. The more accurate delimitation of the cross-sectional area of
the channel as a function of distance along the channel vector is also useful when making
predictions of the conductance properties of channels as discussed below. 

Predicting conductance properties using HOLE

The difficulty in experimentally determining the three-dimensional structures of ion channels
often make it necessary to resort to modelling techniques. Although modelling can lead to insights
into the functional and structural properties of channels there is always the problem of knowing
what level of confidence to place in the model. For this reason, tractable methods of validating a
given model of a channel are required. HOLE has been adapted so that a reasonable prediction of
the conductance of a channel can be rapidly made on the basis of its structure11. 

The method is based on simple Ohmic considerations. The HOLE program can be thought of as
measuring the cross section area A(z) of a pore as a function of distance along the channel direction
vector z. Consider the pore to be filled with an electrolytic solution of resisitivity Þ. A reasonable
approximation of the resistance of the channel is given by:
                           G-1macro = Þ s/A(z) 
where s is the width between parallel planes used in HOLE (see above). Note that in ion channel
patch clamping studies it is normal to consider conductance (G) measured in Siemens (S) rather
than resistance. This type of approach was pioneered by Hille2 and introduced into the HOLE
methodology by Sansom and Kerr 17. 

The above equation assumes that the conductivity of an ionic solution within a channel is equal to
that of bulk solution. This would be true if ion channels had macroscopic dimensions (much larger
than a water molecule). In practice it is found that real channels have a conductance which is
around five times lower than that expected from the above equation giving the macroscopic limit
Gmacro. In order to make a reasonable estimate of the conductance of a channel, an
empirically-based correction factor is used, which is chosen to be dependent on the minimum
radius of the channel: 
                           Gpred = Gmacro/C(Rmin)

The correction factor was parameterized11 on the results obtained for the gramicidin channel14 and
the E. coli OmpF porin15. The prediction routine was tested by "predicting" the conductance found
for all channel-forming proteins and peptides where an experimental structure is available11.
Results are summarized in the following graph: 

                           (click to see picture full size)

Overall, the algorithm yield good results with predictions accurate to within a average factor of 1.8
to the experimental values. This accuracy is sufficient to make the method a useful part in
validating model structures. Further work has been undertaken to reparameterize the correction
function on the basis of all well defined structures which were considered11. Future work will
involve include using molecular dynamics simulation procedures to find quantities such as the
variation of the self-diffusion co-efficient of water molecules within the channel and including
such effects within the prediction methodology. 

It is also possible to adapt the procedure to predict the effect of adding non-electrolytes such as
PEG to conductance measurements. Such experiments can be interpreted in terms of a radius
profile for a channel. Encouraging preliminary results11 have been obtained comparing the
expected profile calculated by HOLE from the X-ray structure of cholera toxin B subunit19 with
the experimental result21. 


References



   1.Walker, J. E. and Saraste, E. Membrane proteins, membrane protein structure. Current
     Opinion in Struct. Biol. 1996, 6, 457-459. 
   2.Hille, B. Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes, 2nd ed. Sinauer Associates Inc,
     Sunderland, MA., 1992. 
   3.Montal, M. Protein folds in channel structure. Current Opinion in Struct. Biol. 1996, 6,
     499-509. 
   4.Adams, P. D., Arkin, I. T., Engelman, D. M., and Brünger, A. T. Computational searching
     and mutagenesis suggest a structure for the pentameric transmembrane domain of
     phospholamban. Nature Struct. Biol. 1995, 2, 154-162. 
   5.Sankararamakrishnan, R., Adcock, C., and Sansom, M. S. P. The pore domain of nicotinic
     acetylcholine receptor: Molecular, modelling, pore dimensions and electrostatics. Biophys.
     J., 71, 1659-1671. 
   6.Smart, O. S., Goodfellow, J. M., and Wallace, B. A. The Pore Dimensions of gramicidin A.
     Biophys. J. 1993, 65, 2455-2460. 
   7.Connolly, M.L. Solvent accessible surfaces of proteins and nucleic acids. Science 1983, 221,
     709-713. 
   8.Kleywegt, G. J., Jones, T.A. Detection, delineation, measurement and display of cavities in
     macromolecular structures. Acta Cryst. Section D, 1994, 50, 178-185. 
   9.Williams, M.A., Goodfellow, J.M., and Thornton, J.M. Buried waters and internal cavities
     in monomeric proteins Protein Science, 1994, 3, 1224-1235. 
  10.Laskowski, R.A. Surfnet - a program for visualizing molecular-surfaces, cavities, and
     intermolecular interactions J. Mol. Graphics, 1995, 13, 323. 
  11.Smart, O. S., Breed, J., Smith, G. R. and Sansom, M. S. P. A Novel Method for
     Structure-Based Prediction of Ion Channel Conductance Properties, Biophys. J., in the press. 
  12.Smart, O. S., Wallace, B. A., and Goodfellow, J. M. Preliminary analysis of the pore
     dimensions of annexin V. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 1994, 22, 146s. 
  13.Ketchem, R. R., Hu, W. and Cross, T. A. High-resolution conformation of gramicidin-A in
     a lipid bilayer by solid-state NMR. Science 1993, 261, 1457-1460 
  14.Arseniev, A. S., Barsukov, I. L., Bystrov, V. F., Lomize, A. L. and Ovchinnikov, Yu. A.
     1H-NMR study of gramicidin A transmembrane ion channel: head-to-head right handed
     single stranded helices. FEBS Lett. 1985, 186, 168-174 
  15.Cowan, S. W., Schirmer, T., Rummel, G., Steiert, M., Ghosh, R., Pauptit, R. A., Jansonius, J.
     N. and Rosenbusch, J. P. Crystal structures explain functional properties of two E. coli
     porins. Nature 1992, 358, 727-733. 
  16.Weiss, M. S. and Schulz, G. E. Structure of porin refined at 1.8Å resolution. J. Mol. Biol.
     1992 227493-509. 
  17.Sansom, M. S. P., and Kerr, I. D. Transbilayer pores formed by beta-barrels: Molecular
     modeling of pore structures and properties. Biophys. J. 1995, 69, 1334-1343. 
  18.Schirmer, T., Keller, T. A., Wang, Y. -F., and Rosenbusch J. P. Structural basis for sugar
     translocation through maltoporin channels at 3.1Å resolution. Science 1995 267, 512-514. 
  19.Merritt, E. A., Sarfaty, S., Vandenakker, F., Lhoir, C. Martial, J. A., and Hol, W. G. J.
     Crystal-structure of cholera-toxin B-pentamer bound to receptor g(m1) pentasaccharide.
     Protein Science 1994 3, 166-175. 
  20.Ghadiri, M. R., Granja, J. R., Milligan, R. A., McRee, D. E., and Khazanovich, N.
     Self-assembling organic nanotubes based on a cyclic peptide architecture. Nature 1993, 366,
     324-327. 
  21.Krasilnikov, O. V., Muratkhodjaev, J. N., Voronov, S. E. and Yezepchuk, Y. V. The ionic
     channels formed by cholera toxin in planar bilayer lipid membanes are entirely attributable
     to its B-subunit. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1991, 1067, 166-170. 
  22.Tosteson, M. T. and Tosteson, D. C. Bilayers containing gangliosides develop channels when
     exposed to cholera toxin. Nature 1978 275, 142-144. 
  23.Zhang. R.-G., Scott, D. L., Westbrook, M. L., Nance, S., Spangler, B. D., Shipley, G. G., and
     Westbrook, E. M. The three-dimensional crystal structure of cholera toxin. J. Mol. Biol.
     1995, 251, 563-573. 
  24.Jap, B. K. and Walian, P. J. Biophysics of the structure and function of porins. Quat. Rev.
     Biophys. 1990 23, 367-403. 
